# Data. Together. Let's read about it

## Privacy (September 25)

[🎬 **Recorded Call**](https://youtu.be/mLUCEcfEnxg)

### Intro

Lately we've been hearing some interesting critiques of "privacy as a concept and moral imperative". Let's see if we think they make sense.

**Readings**:

- Selections from Wendy Hui Kyong Chun (2016) [_Updating to Remain the Same: Habitual New Media_](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/updating-remain-same) **focus on Part II Introduction and end of Chapter 4, pp. 93-94, 150-165**
  - Introduction, pp. 1-19
  - Part II Introduction, pp. 93-94
  - Chapter 4, pp. 135-165
  - _See also_: Shubha Sharma (2016) [Mumbai women assert their right to loiter](http://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/mumbai/Mumbai-women-assert-their-right-to-loiter/article16898193.ece)
- Simone Browne (2015) Chapter 4: "What did TSA find in Solange's Fro? Security Theater at the Airport," in _[Dark Matters: On the Surveillance of Blackness](https://www.dukeupress.edu/dark-matters)_
- Jill Lepore (2013) [The Prism: Privacy in an Age of Publicity](https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/06/24/the-prism)
  - _See also_: [The Hidden History of Privacy (Edited) [📹 10:26]](https://video.newyorker.com/watch/the-hidden-history-of-privacy-edited)
- Finn Brunton and Helen Nissenbaum (2015) Chapter 3: "Why is obfuscation necessary?," in [_Obfuscation: A User's Guide for Privacy and Protest_](https://mitpress.mit.edu/books/obfuscation)

### Themes

- **Right to Privacy** as shift from what privacy meant prior
    > "The matter came to a head when the newspapers had a field day on the occasion of the wedding of a daughter, and Mr. Warren became annoyed. It was an annoyance for which the press, the advertisers and the entertainment industry of America were to pay dearly over the next seventy years. Mr. Warren turned to his recent law partner, Louis D. Brandeis, who was destined not to be unknown to history. The result was a noted article, The Right to Privacy, in the Harvard Law Review, upon which the two men collaborated. It has come to be regarded as the outstanding example of the influence of legal periodicals upon the American law." (1960, William L. Prosser's article "Privacy")
    - Jill Lepore traces a shift in the concept of privacy's relation to other concepts (secrecy, mystery, publicity)
        > The right to privacy, as they understood it, is a function of history, a consequence of modernity. Privacy, they argued, hadn’t always been necessary; it had become necessary—because of the shifting meaning and nature of publicity
    - Wendy Chun speaks to a relationship with (neo)liberalism (p. 11-12):
        > bourgeois denigration of the private, however, also coincided with the reification of the bourgeois private or intimate as a shield from publicity...effectively transforming privacy from something privative to something sacred...the domestic was key to defining the boundaries between public and private, for the walls of the home sealed the private from the public
- A changing **relationship of public to private**
    - Lepore shows how "public" got fixed as the opposite of private, but then its meaning shifted over time
        > *publicity*, which for Bentham had meant *transparency* (the opposite of **secrecy**), had come to mean the *attention of the press* (the opposite of **privacy**)
    - Wendy Chun argues in a digital age, and with social media, they have inverted
        > existing social media platforms reverse the position of public/private, because the subject who acts is increasingly on the inside rather than the outside. Subjects act publicly in private, or are ‘caught’ in public acting privately.

- The way uncritical use of concepts including privacy constrain "**alternative ways to inhabit networks**"
    - Wendy Chun:
        > To loiter online, we would have to create technologies that acknowledge, rather than make invisible, the multitude of exchanges that take place around us—technologies that refuse the illusory boundary between audi- ence and spectacle, author and character.86 In addition, we would also have to build ones that question the basic premise that memory should equal storage, that everything read in should be written forward. Importantly, loitering is ephemeral: it inhabits the present. It also can transform ‘open’ private spaces into truly public ones.
    - Finn Brunton and Nissenbaum on Obfuscation (as controlling visibility), part of:
        > Situations arise in which we are obligated to be visible, in which we need to be visible, or want to be visible (whether to friends or compatriots, or as an act of public protest or presence) and still we want to muddy our tracks as best we can
        >
        > a list of ordinary, everyday, eminently practical ways of taking action and talking back, which Scott gathered under the heading "weapons of the weak."... resisting and keeping some measure of autonomy in the balance between consent and outright refusal—most notably, in regard to surveillance, in the work of Gary Marx.

### Notes

#### Attending

- @dcwalk, @mattprice, @flyingzumwalt, @jeremyc, @seung-young, @kelsey, @mr0grog, @rico, @lightandluck, @eric

#### Impressions and questions

- @jeremyc: privacy for media theorists often set up in contrast to: secrecy, and set up as a linear scale
    - relate to persistence & perpetuity. If data merely _persists_ for a limited time, the impact on privacy is much diminished.  These sorts of practical hybrids between privacy and its lack, might help us to de-essentialize privacy.
- @MZ: wendy chun reading was challenging; some concepts I would love help with, e.g. on habit; "a networked personal computer is an oxymoron"; politics of forgiveness -- where did that land?
- @mr0grog: also on wnedy chun: a bunch of unusuual feeling claims around e.g. open source; had trouble pulling stuff out of it in many places.
    - OSS Licensing was footnote 56 from page 13
- @eric: have always felt somewhat detached from the concerns over privacy; 3-4 questions:
    1. chun: what exactly does "loitering" mean, online?
    2. browne: airport as 'critical pedagogical space' -- how does that translate from the physical space of an airport to a less-physical space?
    3. connecting discussions of privacy with those of trust. I feel like we’ve talked a lot about trust/trustlessness (i.e. many applications of blockchain assuming trustlessness and blockchain as the solution). When I was reading these chapters, especially Chun’s, I couldn’t help but think about e.g. the role of trust in fostering a space for loitering, trust<->secrecy, etc.
- more @mr0grog: one aspect of a space that would be more healthy, would be one that doesn't persist. So maybe persistence is a damaging characteristic.
- @dcwalk: one purpose for this month was to pull in alternatives to privacy as an organizing concept for both intellectual and political action.
- @kelsey: was expecting more concrete discussion of what must be transparent, what can be transparent, what must not be, etc. Wasn't obvious to me how all of the readings were related.
- @mz: privacy in my work is very technical/simplistic/straighforward… nice to come a whole bunch of steps back
- @mp: this topic an opportunity to reflect on a normally invisible bedrock in which we ground our assumptions
    - What do we miss, what structures do we leave uninterrogated when we take privacy as a value for granted?
    - A historical unpacking: a concept and set of practices (along with (neo) liberalism)
    - Some bad things about privacy: "window"... privacy as important is taking for granted a division from individual (and outside of us), other ways to imagine relation to society (constitutive for example)
    - When we organized tech and political efforts... we might be instantiating notions about who we are as people
- @seong: shared theme about the paradoxes of "networked life" (introduced by liberalism?), prior to these modes of organization, there were other social forms. in one reading, discussion of differnece between privacy in a small village and in a large city. She suggests that the economization of life is turning us into rational automata. But the real imperative of neoliberalism is turning … into ethics. The more we turn people into nodes that can be comprehended by exposing their data [oops] … Neoliberalism forces us into a very narrow vision of what it means to be human, one in which knowledge becomes… somehow a limited definition of what it means to be human.
- @dawn: most of the talk about this stuff turns into a cryptopunk valorization of privacy. So wanted to upend expectations by bringing in writers who worked around, agianst, or in counterpoint to that conversation. But also all this work seems to be engaged in a set of conversations without which it's hard to understand.
- @jeremy: a lot of emphasis on the historical development of the domestic sphere, and also of a secular sphere which exists in opposition to mysteries/secrets/etc. Then there's perhaps a special role for technology here, in which technology seems to reach into the rights of the person and strip them away, and then a resistance arises post facto. (cf. the New Yorker article). --> but I (JC) am not sold on the importance of this type of analysis for us now.

    > “the defense of privacy follows, and never precedes, the emergence of new technologies for the exposure of secrets. In other words, the case for privacy always comes too late”

- @dcwalk l'histoire des mentalites is such an important de-essentializing effort, can be really helpful for re-imagining what might be possible.
    - also interesting to think about the material conditions that brought right to privacy into being (media coverage!)
- @mp: the ways people talk about this area—
    - writing about everyday life (and expansion of history), including feminist work and understanding the "private" (feminized) sphere versus public sphere in the 19th century
    - within philisophical tradition!:
    - Habermas: "Structural transformation of the public sphere"… public realm as a new idea in the 19th century… relation to Kant
        - the idea that there should be a place where ordinary people come together and express their opinions (and be judged on those, not who they are).
        - documenting authentic public sphere and all the gradients from there
    - Foucault: Where does the idea of "private sphere come from, and what work is it doing to stabilize society"

- @mp: Habit (line through from Aristotle and ethical flourishing?). Pragmatist (James and Dewey)… the world comes into us from our habits — we are not individuals; we are part of the world. The world is us
    - to make a claim about a private sphere (belongs to me alone) is to misunderstand who we are
- @seong: curious about Habermas and Arendt in relation. These advocates for deliberative democracy are challenged by the difficulties of enacting deliberative democracy on a very large scale.  The existence of subcommunities that sustain themselves solely through hatred, or through a quest to eliminate other private communities.  All of this suggests that the ocncept of deliberative democracy is in serious jeopardy.  The Deweyian conception of the individual has been driven out.  Could however obfuscation give us some kind of an out, some kind of a way to preserve a vision of a different path for the future. [such a great question, says Dawn -- and matt too]
- @mz: chun makes the point that new media, networked communication, are tools of neoliberalism, or execute the construction of a neoliberal world order.  How does she see this happening?
    - @dcwak: this use of 'neoliberal' clearly refers back to a long tradition of engaging with the concept. [and then I got distracted listening] … wasn't good… something about the denigration and reification move within the concept of privacy… not sure the whole argument worked for me
- @jc: sometimes this kind of writing is doing a lot of virtue signalling.
- @mp: think that is right (use it to let people know we are on the right side)
    - to refer back to the (re)construct the work new media/neoliberal world order argument…
        - too reductive, too simplistic (e.g., )
- @jc: these accounts sometimes have "a relativism that verges on determinism". To posit that tech doesn't interact with development of norms, community vlaues, etc., is wrong; but to think that tech just imprints itself on the skulls of those who use it — this strips away the possibility of an internal life, and the hope of independence/freedom.
- @dcwalk: back to the question of alternative ways/conceptualizations that could help us here…
    - obfuscation
    - loitering
- @seung: Chun argues that obfuscation can be utilized even under extermely disempowering regimes (of neoliberalism).  People in the most disadvantaged positions can use obfuscation. to hide their tracks, etc. (she has a lot to say about how changing our habits can help us out from under the heel of repressive regimes.) Then goes on to extrapolate that obfuscation is a potentially emancipatory tactic. But maybe she's being too optimistic?
- @dcwalk: Brunton recognizes the radical asymmetry between corporations, nation states on the one hand, and individuals, on the other.  Obfuscation isn't perfect but can be a way to reduce exposure to those powers.
- @jc: would like to ask @mattz about his earlier comment about thinking mechanistically at work in re: the obfuscation piece. [I got a little lost here bc I only skimmed the reading]
    - @mz: for us at PL, we want to build protocols that allow poeple to decide what they want to have public/private.  So, trying to bake that in at a low level.
    - @mz: cf though how unimportant the technical discussion has been to getting people to adopt end-to-end encryption of their communications.
- @kelsey: in discussion in obfuscation piece about the non-optimality of using obfuscation — those args seemed overblown
- @eric resistance v. recovering autonomy… (is this the difference between obfuscation and right to loiter)
    - @dcwalk: I think I have a similar vibe — ad-naseum was mitigated
    - @jcahill: the obfuscation techniques presented in the reading are very hit-and-miss. seong and i were talking about them in depth the other day — there are also some very easy mistakes to make, even if using "secure" systems, that give you away.

- @rob: right to loiter was a type of presence that in those spaces that isn't usually in the design
- @mattz: there are ways p2p approaches could be useful, or there are ways that depending on use they could make things worse… how do you actually change those flows to give the right to loiter?
    - implications for data stewardship? I want to touch on it in mind… without

## Housekeeping

- Conversation with Marvin, Protocol Labs General Council: Net Neutrality, Privacy, Justice and the Law?
    - November timeframe
    - Surface a couple topics and themes from Privacy and Justice that could be questions for them!

### Future Directions

- [A History of Private Life](http://www.hup.harvard.edu/collection.php?cpk=1094)

### Chat Log

12:44:41	 Seong-Young Her : one of the readings mentioned: privacy, secrecy, mystery, obfuscation  
12:49:39	 Matt Price : find hte page numberfor the open source stuff rob?  
12:50:36	 Matt Price : lenore maybe SY?  
12:50:42	 Rob Brackett : OSS Licensing was footnote 56 from p13  
12:50:59	 Dawn : I don’t think she does in the book @eric  
12:56:36	 Eric : oh! my 3rd question/area of interest: connecting discussions of privacy with those of trust. I feel like we’ve talked a lot about trust/trustlessness (i.e. many applications of blockchain assuming trustlessness and blockchain as the solution). When I was reading these chapters, especially Chun’s, I couldn’t help but think about e.g. the role of trust in fostering a space for loitering, trust<->secrecy, etc.  
12:57:29	 Jeremy Cahill : the obfuscation piece might be a way to get into "what is in scope", since it lists a lot of things used by many actors for many reasons  
12:57:33	 Jeremy Cahill : to varying degrees of success  
12:58:54	 Dawn : Matt P next!  
13:02:36	 Kelsey : “privacy” as important contingent on the assumption that some who we’re protecting information from, will use it for ill  
13:02:48	 Jeremy Cahill : - had a thought about the "window" problem  
13:03:56	 Matt Price : i'll get back on notetaking now thx dawn!  
13:04:08	 Dawn : good I was mucking up ;)  
13:05:28	 Jeremy Cahill : seong and i were discussing yesterday the https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johari_window and the current `limitation of the syllogistic` in viewing the world as modelable with a _single_ window  
13:05:31	 Jeremy Cahill : https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Square_of_opposition  
13:06:41	 Jeremy Cahill : 3. The (Ir)relevance of Syllogistic
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/square/#IrrSyl  
13:06:57	 Matt Price : help me out seung, lost the thread!  
13:07:22	 Seong-Young Her : @matt what are you looking for?  
13:08:15	 Matt Price : just if you cna fix up my notes of yr contribution :-/  
13:09:15	 Matt Price : I cna talk a little bit about habit if people want.  
13:09:56	 Dawn : Yeah Matt! I think after this we should transition (tho we’re getting the perf setup) into the history of privacy then maybe habit too!  
13:10:23	 Matt Price : actually I cna talk about public sphere/liberalism stuff, for that part.  
13:11:02	 Dawn : “the defense of privacy follows, and never precedes, the emergence of new technologies for the exposure of secrets. In other words, the case for privacy always comes too late”  
13:12:38	 Matt Price : ah shoot I didn'tread that.  only the talk, which I didn't finish.  
13:14:25	 Matt Price : oh wait actually i did read that ...  
13:15:00	 Jeremy Cahill : the talk has a transcript. worth copying out bc the video player doesn't have playback speed control  
13:15:57	 Seong-Young Her : @matt the more we turn people into nodes that can be comprehended by exposing their data, the more neoliberalism can force us into a very narrow vision of what it means to be human, one in which life is economized. This economization of life and the individualized epistemology of human beings seem to justify one another in neoliberalism, because knowledge and economization go hand in hand in (according to neoliberals) mutually beneficial transactions between informed and voluntary individuals  
13:16:27	 Jeremy Cahill : relevant book on my desk atm: A History of Private Life  
13:16:51	 Jeremy Cahill : http://www.hup.harvard.edu/collection.php?cpk=1094  
13:22:26	 Dawn : Amazing!  
13:22:37	 Dawn : Seong your next!  
13:27:08	 Jeremy Cahill : is privacy 'defense in depth' actually additive  
13:27:44	 Matt Price : some if it is actually a whole lot of fun.  
13:27:54	 Dawn : it makes me want to listen to Matt P lectures all the time!  
13:28:29	 Dawn : please dig!  
13:29:50	 Dawn : p. 11 “Neoliberalism’s emphases on individual interest and market transactions spread the private (as market) and by doing so apparently destroy the private (as the intimate, darkened space necessary for growth and freedom);”  
13:30:28	 Jeremy Cahill : an emerging vernacular usage of `neoliberalism` := rules i don't (want to) have to follow  
13:30:46	 Dawn : we were talking about that article last week Jeremy  
13:32:21	 Jeremy Cahill : yeah. the relevance here imo being, in re mattp's mention of multiple derivations and polysemy, that "neoliberalism" in modern readings is a minefield unless you're hugely peripherally aware of the embedded context  
13:35:47	 Jeremy Cahill : The Moustache of Understanding
http://rolocroz.com/junk/friedman.gif  
13:36:59	 Jeremy Cahill : re mattp's neoliberalis app terraforming  
13:37:00	 Jeremy Cahill : https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recapitulation_theory  
13:37:33	 Dawn : After this maybe lets start to revisit Seong’s question and revisit “alternative ways”  
13:37:43	 Matt Zumwalt : +1  
13:39:21	 Eric : +1 related: could someone give a brief rundown of the obfuscation argument? That’s one reading I wasn’t able to get to.  
13:39:59	 Matt Price : I also agree that the lingo is deployed to take high ground in an argument.  that is, as a cheat.     
13:40:06	 Matt Price : not necessarily here! but often.  
13:42:24	 Dawn : I liked this as suggestive encouragement from the Bruntion reading: “Situations arise in which we are obligated to be visible, in which we need to be visible, or want to be visible (whether to friends or compatriots, or as an act of public protest or presence) and still we want to muddy our tracks as best we can”  
13:43:23	 Dawn : emancipatory  
13:45:09	 Matt Price : political scientist.  James C. Scott.   
13:45:09	 Jeremy Cahill : would like to ask mattz about his earlier comment about thinking mechanistically at work in re: the obfuscation piece  
13:46:08	 Seong-Young Her : Jeremy knows a lot about those kinds of tools  
13:46:29	 Dawn : only friendly interrogations  
13:46:48	 Dawn : so the stack I see:  
13:46:50	 Dawn : - Kelsey  
13:46:52	 Dawn : - Eric  
13:49:21	 Matt Price : Is there some way that we can come back even veyr briefly to a discussion of what kind of a world we would need for Amanda Todd-like incidents not to be possible.  That is, for "privacy" *not to matter in the ocncrete social lives of the vulnerable*  
13:49:38	 Dawn : +1 Matt P, would like revisit that :)  
13:50:11	 Matt Price : which is somehow orthogonal or opposed to the problem of state power.  
13:51:22	 Kelsey : @dawn I’m happy to forgo my place on the stack, want to hear more on this thread  
13:52:48	 Jeremy Cahill : the EFF's rationale for ending their Secure Messaging Scorecard   goes into all their reservations about pedagogy, but i still think that perfect is the enemy of good in that case  
13:53:10	 Dawn : I’m gonna make a slight interjection after Matt Z as a point on facilitation/timekeeping!  
13:53:23	 Jeremy Cahill : thx  
13:53:33	 Kelsey : on this, the controversy around Patriot Act legislation making it ok for get to look at anything “being sent internationally” but then, you don’t actually know where the servers your email is sent on lives, so your domestic email to friends & family is accessible too  
13:53:44	 Matt Price : I might  
13:53:45	 Jeremy Cahill : all good  
13:55:14	 Matt Price : yeah it did seem odd to me.  
13:57:33	 Matt Price : I think I have to go -- I hear Maceo trying to sneak off without checking in.   
13:57:42	 Dawn : okay Matt P  
13:57:43	 Matt Price : so, wil ltry to come back but sorry gotta split ofr a minute.  
13:59:45	 Jeremy Cahill : the obfuscation techniques presented in the reading are very hit-and-miss. seong and i were talking about them in depth the other day -- there are also some very easy mistakes to make, even if using "secure" systems, that give you away.  
14:00:03	 Jeremy Cahill : an example: using securedrop on a subdomain, which leaks DNS requests! nytimes iirc did this  
14:01:47	 Jeremy Cahill : i'd have to pull up notes after  
14:03:17	 Dawn : jeremy: feel free to share your notes if you want them included!  
14:03:39	 Jeremy Cahill : ^re: rob, that i think is what i was trying to handwave toward at the beginning with "persistence" vs. permanence   
14:05:58	 Jeremy Cahill : re: mattz and p2p solutions, it was striking to see bittorrent described in *past tense* in one of the texts. like it's a distant memory    
14:06:57	 Rob Brackett : ^ Jeremy: yes, that’s definitely what I was thinking when you said it :)  
