# Data. Together. Let's read about it

## Trust (May 12)

[🎬 **Recorded Call**](https://youtu.be/dgQuGy5BdAw)

## Intro
New technologies attempt to free us from (data) monopolized spaces, but does cryptographic trust truly map onto or enable better human-to-human (or human-to-company or human-to-technology) trust?

## Readings
* [Optional] doteveryone. (2020). _Executive Summary **only**_ from [People, Power and Technology: The 2020 Digital Attitudes Report](https://www.doteveryone.org.uk/report/peoplepowertech2020/) _for a take on trust in the technology context more broadly_
* Wikipedia contributors. (2020, May 15). [Trust (social science)](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trust_(social_science)&oldid=956870314)
* Satoshi Nakamoto. (2009). _Introduction **only**_ from [Bitcoin: A Peer-to-Peer Electronic Cash System](https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf) _for the thing that kicked off this wave of trust-free technology_
* Libra Association Members (2020). _Cover Letter (pp. 1-3) and Libra Association (pp. 24-26) **only**_ from [Libra White Paper v2.0](https://libra.org/en-US/white-paper/) _for a view on gatekeeping and trust_
* David Cohen and William Mougayar (2015, Jan 18). [After The Social Web, Here Comes The Trust Web](https://techcrunch.com/2015/01/18/after-the-social-web-here-comes-the-trust-web/)
* Finn Brunton (2019). _Chapter 3 (pp. 33-46) and "The Trust Bulb" in Chapter 10 (pp. 165-170) **only**_ from [Digital Cash: The Unknown History of the Anarchists, Utopians, and Technologists who created Cryptocurrency](https://press.princeton.edu/books/hardcover/9780691179490/digital-cash)

## Themes
- Human and Cryptographic 
- Misuse / co-option, leveraging of the term trust
- Why are the dominant metaphors for trust in tech financial?


## Notes
- Human and Cryptographic 
- Misuse / co-option, leveraging of the term trust
- EDGI history: lack of trust in the state
    - recent context with protest: who do we trust; police? no; barricades controlling access to TAZ that has been set up in Seattle
    - e.g., John Brown Gun Club against Proud Boys 
    - A building of community trust in moment 
    - Not "trust" in decentralization in a concept... not sustainable, still a need for something?
        - Still wanting to use twitter
    - dc: follow up: "not a consensus of trust"
- Tech mixed up with trust relationships?
    - dc: trustless tech, silicon valley deals with this too: any social reputation system mediates that
- Social perspective on trust:
    - based on vulnerability
    - tech-based trust: based on invulnerability... based on feeling comfortable that nothing is gonna happen 
        - ... conceptualizing it as trust the opposite of what it actually is
    - Ke: building tech relationships within EDGI... the way was through: reliability... showing up for each other on a weekly basis; 
    - M: feedback loop of trust (and mistrust)... in interpersonal situations. A process but in terms of "tech" trust: it's a first-principles /structure over process
    - B5: "real relationship of trsut starts with no protocol, evolves over time."
        - lead with vuln, move forward 
        - in protocol perspective: reign in, define
        - following defunding, a committment to work on a new thing as a way forward. An interesting display of trust? Framing of decentralization falls apart here
        - different trust convo: not trusting police 
    - DC: there are people trying to bring dweb (blockchain) tech to this moment, srsly! PURE IDEOLOGY
    - DC: protocol as model: what about ways that they can be used to create space for trust and relationship building and maintenence... indigineous STS labs and the way those do so and grow 
    - K: truth-default theory; following protocol as being actual good will
- DC: move into cryptographic trust, cryptocurrencies
- M: connect to last week and monopolies. Intersection of health data with blockchain
    - if you abuse trust & fail to activate the negative feedback, there is limited possibility to rescind trust
- B5: notion of being de-anonymized in any PII. Implication of anonymity on platforms.
    - Blockchain is a technology – you can move things off
    - Z-cash: anonymization optimized in this space
    - Intersects "do I trust the tech" and "what types of trust does the tech enable"
    - If you can have a fully anon blockchain, can you prevent contract tracing NSA problem. Collection of individually owned things
    - Libra paper speaks to antithesis – unclear why there is a blockchain
- DC: Brunton quotes (paraphrased af, obvi)
> Bitcoin is an incremental tech so the actual tech advance small, but implication connects to larger history of digital cash schemes
    
> The coin in bitcoin. Bitcoin as an electronic coin is chain of signatures. No existence outside of the chain of verification.

> Deliberate inefficiency as replacement for trusted third party. Trust in scarcity rather than in people

- B5: contextualization of this tech. Came out of libertarian groups. Contrast w trust web article in techcrunch.
    - "smart contract" invokes notion of law
    - beauty of BC as a project is its scope. Digital scarcity is applied to a ledger
- DC: even in intro to bc paper, intent was nothing less than replacement of entire financial system
    - Set of different underlying technological assumptions
- B5: Cryptographic definition of trust is this concept that economics can save us. If we can wrest away control of money, we can move forward and design better futures
- KB: corruptive influence of using tangibles to sub for intangibles "value" "trust"
- DC: people conflating affordances of these technologies. Bail block fund uses distributed computing to raise bail for people
- Via M: https://cointelegraph.com/news/bail-bloc-founder-says-how-monero-mining-can-help-ice-detainees
- DC: Also Black Socialists of America app "Dual App"
    - a reworking of underpinnings of these technologies?
- Kelsey: RE: bailgiving money to the state

- Kevin: enforced system of markets, use money because we have to 
    - blockchain models of reform not enough, not accounting for like what would happen to gift economies 

- b5: barter conomies, independence and freedom
- k: trust requires choice
- b5: co-option of language... "Trust"
- ke: circular trades and reowkring barter 

- Abolition https://theappeal.org/justice-in-america-episode-20-mariame-kaba-and-prison-abolition/
- M: User control of rings of trust. Technical enablement of actual in-person trust

## Discussion


## Chat log
00:11:24	Kelsey Breseman:	I read that book on audiobook a while ago, would recommend! Can dip in and out and there’s always something interesting being discussed
00:12:10	Dawn, dc (she/her):	Pad for notes: https://hackmd.io/oEcuKALCTi-PbawLmT_Ixw#
00:13:28	Kelsey Breseman:	esp compared w the illustration on that same techcrunch article
00:13:33	Kelsey Breseman:	v misleading conflation
00:20:43	Kelsey Breseman:	“what we want tech to be or enable re trust"
00:21:59	Kelsey Breseman:	& there is really strong call for trust & accountability on the hashtag– somebody says X and people reply confirmations or ask for confirmations
00:23:04	Kelsey Breseman:	trust is *earned*
00:25:03	Kelsey Breseman:	role of protocol is an interesting q
00:25:16	Kelsey Breseman:	protocol as guiderails for how to earn trust in a specific community?
00:26:06	Kelsey Breseman:	^ more abusable than no-protocol?
00:27:00	mash:	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Truth-default_theory
00:30:08	b5 | Brendan O'Brien (he/him):	deeeeep agree
00:33:43	Dawn, dc (she/her):	WHAT ABOUT BGP!!!!!!
00:40:30	Kelsey Breseman:	thanks for that Novi article, really helped
00:45:08	Kelsey Breseman:	how apocalyptic is that, to choose to trust scarcity rather than the reliability of people
00:47:23	Kelsey Breseman:	super deontological
00:49:29	Kelsey Breseman:	ugh my audio is messing up
00:50:19	Dawn, dc (she/her):	The audio is on my end -- gonna see what I can do on my end
00:50:45	Kelsey Breseman:	abolish money
00:51:29	Dawn, dc (she/her):	#defundthepolice #exitcapitalism
00:52:43	Dawn, dc (she/her):	Was also gonna say: the Black Socialist of America Dual Power app
00:54:01	mash:	https://cointelegraph.com/news/bail-bloc-founder-says-how-monero-mining-can-help-ice-detainees
00:56:47	Kelsey Breseman:	lots of money = proxy for lots of trust, goes with “are they poor because they’re ___”
00:57:50	Kevin @lightandluck:	+1
00:57:55	Kelsey Breseman:	trust impossible if you have no choice
00:58:06	mash:	+1
00:59:39	mash:	gift economy?
01:00:16	mash:	https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.5749/j.ctt32bcgj ?
01:02:35	Dawn, dc (she/her):	Also happy to share a pdf of it
01:03:08	mash:	https://theappeal.org/justice-in-america-episode-20-mariame-kaba-and-prison-abolition/ ?
01:04:57	Dawn, dc (she/her):	http://criticalresistance.org/abolish-policing/ I think has a comparison of abolition and non-abolition techniques
01:05:22	Kelsey Breseman:	also straight-up love that in fact its GoT because everybody watched that so they can replicate
01:08:21	Kelsey Breseman:	Google+! ahahaha
01:09:30	mash:	LOL
01:09:48	Kelsey Breseman:	useful bc it doesn’t try to “create” trust, just lets you more accurately map the existing trust relationships you build
01:10:10	Kelsey Breseman:	also why blocking someone on Fb, even now when nobody loves Fb, is still like a top-level insult
01:15:55	b5 | Brendan O'Brien (he/him):	so sorry folks, gotta jet (kid needs a bath)
01:16:03	Kelsey Breseman:	bye brendan!
01:16:06	Kevin @lightandluck:	take care Brendan!
01:16:07	mash:	byebye!
01:16:15	b5 | Brendan O'Brien (he/him):	stay safe all, and thanks for the great talk
01:16:32	Dawn, dc (she/her):	bye!
01:17:45	Kelsey Breseman:	whole other can of worms, but they also use our individuality. Cops on roof were shining flashlights down and pointing at individuals.
01:18:01	Kelsey Breseman:	unclear why, but I know they have a partnership w Amazon’s facial recog
01:22:09	Kelsey Breseman:	David Graeber/Debt is sooo good on that stuff
01:22:29	Dawn, dc (she/her):	thanks for catching my mic! My mouse died and is charging :((
01:24:14	Kevin @lightandluck:	credit
01:24:58	mash:	https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Debt:_The_First_5000_Years
01:25:09	Kelsey Breseman:	oh right 5000 heh
01:25:25	Kevin @lightandluck:	+1 that "heuristic" part stood out to me too
01:26:36	Kevin @lightandluck:	+1 agree, having privacy/secret is important too
01:27:03	Kelsey Breseman:	Privacy is our next topic!
01:27:11	Kelsey Breseman:	https://github.com/datatogether/reading_datatogether/issues/76